welcome to another night sky news
everybody there is far too much to talk
about to waste time on introduction so
let's get straight into it with what you
can see in the night sky in this coming
month
so the 23rd and 24th of May
my usual favorite thing to see in the
sky a toenail moon with Venus but this
month mercury as well this is gonna be a
lot easier to spot on the 24th the
rather than the 23rd because and the
23rd the moon's gonna be the barest
sliver of a crescent near Venus and also
very close to the horizon so on the 24th
a little bit bigger and also have risen
a little bit higher as well so you can
use the moon to then find Venus which
will be incredibly bright you shouldn't
be able to miss it and then once you're
there you should be able to find mercury
from there as well could make you would
just be that little bit higher than
Venus and you'll need that because
Mercury's so much fainter than Venus and
when it's out the Sun is still sort of
lighting up the sky a little bit during
Twilight so if you are in a very dark
location you have a chance of video to
see it with the naked eye but otherwise
just you know crack out the binoculars
and see if you can find it
mercury will get easier to spot as the
week's go on so by the 3rd of June he'll
hit what's called its greatest
elongation which is basically the
furthest point in the sky that it will
get away from the Sun it's the moment
which mercury the Sun and Earth make a
nice right-angled triangle as for Venus
though it is getting closer to the Sun
from Earth's perspective anyway all the
time now so this is actually the last
chance we're really gonna be able to see
Venus this month by the end of the month
it will have actually set because it
will be so close to Sun you don't even
ever stay during the day and the Sun is
too bright to do that
so if you love the toenail Moon or the
tiny crescent moon as much as I do
and Venus together make sure you spot it
on the 23rd and 24th of May then for the
early risers by the 12th and 13th of
June the moon which will be doesn't just
pass fall by that point will be very
close to Mars in the sky it will also be
very close to sort of Saturn and Jupiter
which should be sort of just up and to
the south of it and it's a great time to
try and use the moon to spot Mars Mars
will have that sort of distinctive
reddish tint to it Jupiter would be
incredibly bright in the south and
against that
close to it but not as bright seen if
you're not sure what you're seeing is
Saturn or Jupiter or Mars then what
you're gonna need is one of those night
sky apps which is why this month's
episode is actually sponsored by
redshift Sky Pro this is a stargazing
app that once it knows your location you
can point it in any direction in the sky
and it will tell you what you are
looking at it's a great way to find
objects like planets comets or even
nebulae but also to make sure that what
you see then this guy actually is what
you think it is as well it also has a
red light feature to turn your phone
screen red so that you don't ruin your
night vision whilst you're out
stargazing
which is actually one of my favorite
features of the app it's available in
ten different languages from both the
Google Play and Apple app stores and
from today Wednesday the 20th of May
until Sunday the 24th of May they're
actually having a sale so instead of
costing you eight pounds ninety-nine it
only cost you seven pounds 99 to
download it so if you like the sound of
that the link is in the description next
I want to talk about something that
people probably don't stop to think
about very often and this will depend on
your location sort of on planet earth
you know depending on what latitude
you're actually at but for sort of the
mid latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere
anyway as we get into sort of the middle
of June this is when your earliest
sunrises are going to be you can see
this for your specific location at
websites like this this is time and date
calm so you can see here for Oxford for
the earliest sunrise is 4:45 on the 15th
to the 18th of June but the actual
longest day is not until the 20th of
June ie the summer solstice now the
further north you are the closer to the
actual Solstice your longest day will
fall but then the closer to the equator
you get the more pronounced the
difference so for example in Honolulu in
Hawaii in the States though earliest
sunrise there is actually late May and
then actually their latest sunset don't
come until early July it all comes down
to how we measure time and how we
measure what a day
is there some definition obviously is
that a day is how long it takes for the
earth to spin on its axis but the thing
is you need a reference point to decide
at what point the full day has passed so
a good reference point to use would be
mid day now talking about 12:00 p.m.
during the daytime I'm talking about the
point at which the Sun reaches its
highest point in the sky so in fact the
time that it takes the earth to rotate a
full 360 degrees is 23 hours and 56
minutes but the time it takes for the
Sun to go back to the same position in
the sky is 24 hours those extra four
minutes come from playing catch-up to
get the earth to rotate just that little
bit further round so that the Sun is in
the same position at noon again but also
this is just an average because the
Earth's orbit is also not a perfect
circle it's an oval-shaped so sometimes
we are further away from the Sun and
we're moving a little bit slower and
sometimes we're closer to the Sun and
moving a little bit faster it means that
the difference between two successive
solar mid days is about 40 seconds
shorter in July and about 20 seconds
longer in January these ever so slight
differences you know if just a minute or
so meaning that our clocks the earliest
sunrise does come before the Solstice
despite the fact that if you were truly
on solar time on the sun's time there
I've bang on schedule right enough night
sky chat let's talk about all the cool
astronomy news that's been happening
this month because not only do we have a
possible unsolved mystery a fast radio
bursts but we also have some black hole
news
so I usually start this segment off by
showing a really cool image that's been
taken but like a telescope or a space
mission but how about this month we
instead start with a piece of audio so
on the 9th of April ESA's bepi Columbo
mission which is currently on its way to
mercury did a fly past the earth for a
gravitational boost in energy from us
then on the 5th of May this month
ESO actually released that data but what
they've done is sauna fied it so what
they recorded was the vibrations
detected by the accelerometer on board
the spacecraft which when they're in
their normal form are a very low
frequency it's not audible to humans at
all but what they've done is play with
the frequency so that we can actually
hear it and then also condense about an
hour's worth of data into sort of a
minute as well
so what you can hear there is
essentially bepi Colombo's vibrations as
it moves through space so one of the ISA
scientists on this mission who's called
Carmelo magnifico which is a great name
I'm kind of jealous compared it to
putting your ear to a railway track and
sort of listening to see if the train
was coming which is a beautiful analogy
if not a recklessly stupid luck to put
your ear to a train track moving on from
fun data sonification now I'm getting a
little bit ahead of myself here but I
figured people would want to know that
this was happening before the actual
fact
so the first crewed mission of SpaceX's
Dragon capsule is due to take place on
May 27th it will be taking astronauts up
to the International Space Station for
the first time it's been tested uncrewed
many many times passed all the tests and
this will be the first crewed one it
marks the first time that astronauts
have been launched from US soil up to
the International Space Station since
2011 when the space shuttle program was
retired so it's been a long time coming
they've been using the Soyuz capsule in
Russia for many many years now which is
very old seventies tech so they've
needed something new for a long time
NASA is somehow managing to coordinate
all of this despite the pandemic and the
lockdown you know they're all working
remotely you know Mission Control is now
the spare bedrooms of living rooms
obviously there are some very critical
personnel still on site there's only a
very few people exempt though and it's
kind of strange to me that this kind of
stuff is still happening during the
pandemic I'd say what if I was an
astronaut onboard the International
Space Station right now knowing that two
people from Earth were coming up I want
to know that they've been quarantined
and tested the hell out of before they
came to my space station because the
last thing we need after the two months
we've all had is kovat in space alright
on to my favorite topic now of black
holes so if you had asked me about two
weeks ago where is the nearest black
hole to earth
would have said why it's V six one six
menorah sits about 3,000 light years
away and it's orbiting a star that's
just a little bit smaller than the Sun
you know we've detected x-rays coming
from it as far back as 1917 in 1994 we
worked out the mass of it and found out
that you know it was far too big to be
anything but a black hole but that no
longer holds the title anymore because
in comes hr6
eight one nine in this paper by Rivini
as' and collaborators this month so this
is a black hole not just orbiting one
star it's orbiting two stars it's
actually in a triple system it's about
1,100 light-years away so about three
times closer than V six one six one
Asura so talking about before but this
wasn't known to be a triple star system
people thought it was a double star
system because you could actually see
the two stars and so it was included in
a study of double star systems that
these authors were doing with the 2.2
meter telescope at esos La Silla
Observatory in Chile bar we see for this
system when they observed it they found
that the orbits of these two stars just
didn't make sense at all if there was
only two stars there at least there had
to be a third object in that system now
they couldn't see a third object but
that doesn't automatically mean that
it's a black hole it could be something
like a neutron star or a brown dwarf
something like that they just figure out
was its mass and you do that by sort of
saying okay well I have all of these
possible three body systems of all these
different masses together and which one
best fits what I've observed and they
found the one that best fits is if that
unseen object was 4.2 times the mass of
the Sun ie a clear black hole like it
couldn't have been anything else it was
too heavy to be anything else but a
black hole now this would have been
noteworthy anyway because it was the
closest black hole to earth I mean I am
still secretly hoping that this
hypothetical Planet nine that's supposed
to exist this also sim is actually a
tiny primordial black hole that's like
the size of a tennis ball just because I
want
or system to have a pep like call but
you know that hasn't been proved at all
yet so you know I'll keep dreaming with
that one but there's two reasons why
this result is also very very cool on
top of the fact that it's the closest
black hole to the first one is that the
stars that it's actually orbiting around
are visible with the naked eye like most
cool things in the sky though it's
visible from the southern hemisphere and
not the northern hemisphere which is so
annoying I'm just incredibly jealous of
you southern hemisphere Ian's again it's
in a constellation called telescope IAM
which is possibly the most boring
constellation ever it's just two stars
joined up with the lives below like a
telescope but hopefully you should be
able to find it especially where the
night sky at like redshift sky Pro again
and then you can go outside and look at
these stars and know that you are
currently looking at a black hole the
second reason of this result is really
really cool is because we don't tend to
find black holes like this black holes
that we can't actually see and we've
only just infer that there because of
the orbits of the stars that might sound
a bit weird because you know the
definition of a black hole is something
we can't get light from at all but the
majority of black holes that we know
about including v6 1-6 menorahs that i
talked about at the beginning that's the
old closest black hole to the second
closest black hole to earth now is
because they're actually giving off
x-rays that's all the black hole itself
it's the material that the black hole is
taking in so the black hole gets greedy
if it's all between another star it can
drag gas off that the gas spirals around
the black coin what we call an accretion
disk and it heats up because it's going
so fast and it starts to glow in things
like x-rays sometimes even radio
emission if you get very energetic
systems like the supermassive black
holes in the center of galaxies you can
also see like UV an optical from that
accretion disk as well so the majority
of black holes we know about are in
these x-ray binary star systems and we
know of about a hundred or so of those
things and not all of them will either
be
black holes either we think some of them
are neutron stars are not quite massive
enough to be a black hole but
unfortunately that number doesn't match
up with what models say for our
population of the Milky Way so if you
sort of synthesize what you think a huge
collection of stars hundreds of billions
of stars in the Milky Way would be like
and what they do and how they spend the
lives how they end their lives how many
would be big enough to turn into a black
hole haven't even big enough to neutron
star white dwarf etc etc you end up
predicting that in a galaxy like the
Milky Way of a hundred billion stars
there should be about a billion black
holes as well so the question is whether
the models our over predicting the
number of black holes or we're just
missing a huge population of black holes
in the Milky Way which could indeed be
true we've made some estimates before
given how many x-ray binaries we've been
able to spot thinking about you know the
distances between stars in these binary
and triple systems and which black holes
if they formed wouldn't accrete mattes
II wouldn't know they're there and we do
get appreciable numbers but nowhere near
a billion so it's a difficult one but
the fact that people have been able to
find a black hole in what was originally
thought to be a double star system has
given people a little bit of hope and
this might be another avenue of research
that people could focus on in order to
try and reconcile these two big issues
and I'm just gonna say this now because
I know this question will come up in the
comments but no a billion black holes
would still not be enough invisible
matter to explain how much dark matter
we think is in galaxies I knew someone
would ask that question so I'm just
jumping on it now next up have we solved
an currently unsolved mystery so in my
top ten list of unsolved mysteries I
posted last week number eight in that
list was what is causing fast radio
bursts these incredibly short of the
order of like millisecond bursts of
radio waves coming from space outside of
our own galaxy from all different
directions we've detected these from
some of which have repeated some of
which haven't repeated
seen them once and then we've never
heard from them again
usually when they repeat they repeat
with no apparent pattern either and so
all the ones who were detected so far
have come from outside our own galaxy
and we know that they must come from
something that is incredibly small
because the bursts of energy is so short
but also that it must be incredibly
energetic because in that millisecond
bursts the same amount of energy is
released as is released by the Sun in 80
years and there has been so many
hypotheses just flying around since
these things were first detected back in
like 2007 or something that we're trying
to explain you know what's producing a
fast radio bursts and no one had really
agreed yet on what the most likely
mechanism was but on the 28th of April
this year so I try to radio telescopes
detected a burst of radio waves from a
magnetar in our own Milky Way galaxy
that something like 30,000 light years
away and there's bursts of radio waves
looked very similar to the FRBS the fast
radio bursts that we detect from outside
our galaxy so my guitars are essentially
neutron stars right the leftover
remnants of a supernova where the matter
has been crushed down and down and down
until all you're left with is neutrons
as closely packed as they can go
magnet ours there are a special type of
neutron star because they have a huge
magnetic field like a thousand times
stronger than a normal neutron star does
and we don't really understand where
those magnetic field comes from because
nobody knows physics understands
magnetic field especially at such high
intensities they kind of we just don't
see here on earth but what we do see is
the effects of this incredibly strong
and I see if you ought it actually
distorts the shape of the star because
sort of the magnetic field and gravity
are sort of in constant competition with
each other and it's thought that these
distortions lead to things such as like
starquakes
which can then give rise these flare
of x-rays or radio waves so on April
27th this magnetar had such a flare
possibly from a starquake and that was
detected in x-rays by for example the
swift telescope and that wasn't anything
particularly special a lot of bang stars
already do that but the very next day is
when that bursts of radio waves was then
also detected as well that was had a
very similar signature to the fast radio
bursts that we detect from extra
galactic sources so these radio bursts
were detected by the chyme experiment in
Canada that's been detecting you know
reams and reams of these fast radio
bursts from outside our Milky Way and
also project called stair 2 which is a
radio antenna array that was
specifically set up to search or listen
for these fast radio bursts coming from
the Milky Way itself because people have
been hypothesizing for a while that if
they're happening in other galaxies then
eventually something should happen in
the Milky Way too now if you took the
signal that both chime and stair to have
actually detected and you correct it for
the differing distances then yes it
would look very similar to the fast
radio bursts we detect extra
galactically however what they've not
done yet is actually compare what's
called the spectrum of light you receive
in that radio bursts so when you take
the light that you receive and split it
into its component wavelengths and look
at the trace does that look very similar
so that's sort of the piece of
information people are still waiting for
and if they find that they are
incredibly similar and that probably
will be the smoking gun that says yes
it's very likely that man Qatar's
are responsible for these fast radio
bursts however even if that does happen
it doesn't mean that magnet ARS are the
only explanation for fast radio bursts
it could be that we need another
hypothesis entirely to explain the ones
that burst repeatedly or maybe the
magnets I'll explain the ones that burst
repeatedly but don't explain the ones
that just have a single flare and then
we don't hear from them again so it's
actually a mad scramble now to analyze
all the data that's been collected so
this isn't a paper that's been published
and out
this this was what's called an
astronomers telegram where people
basically just put a shout out like hey
we detected this thing from this part of
the sky and so that's all that's been
announced so far
that this was detected that it's a known
location of a magnetar obviously putting
two and two together could mean that
yeah okay the very likely origin of fast
radio bursts is a magnetar but we don't
know that for sure yet but it is a good
step in the right direction so I am very
sorry to disappoint all of you that
we're secretly hoping that it would be
aliens one day maybe it will turn out
that the weird signals we're receiving
from space are aliens that's it for this
month's night sky news as always if you
do any stargazing and you take any
pictures send them my way on either
Twitter or Instagram I always love love
to see them but until next time friends
you know stay home stay safe and happy
stargazing I feel like I should have
like a cat or something to stroke in
this fancy new office chair that I'm
certain been in they also had a
micrometer micrometer no map magnet Oh
meter magnetometer magnetometer magnet
magnetometer really doesn't roll off the
tongue that was mister black hole please
tell us why you had to hide away for so
long it's camera that only record
straight don't know where I got cut off
on but it's times like these your charge
your battery man it's times like the
28th of April to radio telescopes scopes
Gibbs what am i sorted
you